`ot_i2c_host_proxy`: implement device for external I2C communication (#190)
lowRISC/qemu: docs/opentitan/i2c_transport.md

# OpenTitan I2C Transport

> The `ot-i2c-transport` device provides a way to carry out I2C transactions with QEMU I2C bus devices through an externally driven socket `chardev` interface.

Reviewer: I would recommend to keep the wrap width to 100 col max as with existing OT docs in docs/opentitan.

The device can issue read or write transactions with devices and is intended to be used to drive the Opentitan I2C device Target mode functionality through OpenTitanTool, but the protocol is simple enough that it can be used manually using `netcat` to type out issued commands.

## Configuration

A socket and transport device can be created in QEMU with the following arguments:

`-chardev socket,id=i2ctp,file=<name>,server=on,wait=off -device ot-i2c-transport,bus=<bus>,chardev=i2ctp`

> Where `bus` is any of the OpenTitan Earlgrey I2C buses: `ot-i2c0`, `ot-i2c1`, or `ot-i2c2`.

Reviewer: May be rather add a reference to EG and DJ machines, as several OT machines use I2C buses, which may have different naming / count, so it is probably better to move machine specific details to machine documentation.

Author: I added a note that these names are for EG. I do not know what the DJ I2C bus name is. 

I think this will need a fix as in EG the devices have a `OT_COMMON_DEV_ID` property that is used to construct the name of the bus in `ot_i2c`. This property is not present in the DJ instantiation.

## Protocol

- There are no timing restrictions on the protocol, and the I2C bus is held while a command is active. Received command bytes are processed immediately by the QEMU I2C subsystem, therefore it is recommended to buffer commands to the OpenTitan I2C target device to allow OT software to fill its FIFO with response data. Readiness of response should be indicated via another mechanism or an expected value can be attempted to be read after a timeout. There is no requirement to do this for other devices on the QEMU I2C bus.

The protocol for issuing commands is as follows:

* A write command begins with `W`, followed by an address byte to select the target device. All subsequent bytes are payload bytes to be sent to the device.

* A read command begins with `R`, followed by an address byte to select the target device. A byte is read and written back for every subsequent `B` byte.

* All bytes values are encoded as a pair of case-insensitive ASCII hex digits. For example, decimal 161 is encoded as either `A1` or `a1`.

> * End of a command is indicated with an `S`, this ends the transaction.

Reviewer: I do not know the capability of the OT I2C target mode capabilities, but how the restart are handled?

_e.g._ in I2C: W A <payload> R A <payload> S
with:
 * W: write
 * R: read
 * A: address
 * S: stop

 BTW not sure to understand how ACK/NACK signalling is handled

Author: Looking at it again, I think there is actually a way to perform something of a "repeated-start condition" and change the transfer direction without ever releasing the bus. I will rework the command parser to allow for this.

In QEMU's I2C implementation, `send` to write a byte of data to a device can NACK by returning a non-zero value. `event` can also NACK a start event. All other event and transfer types such as `recv` and `send_async` must succeed. In those cases the special `!!` value is returned instead of any data.

Reviewer: Should'nt the protocol over the socket closely stick to the I2C protocol? I'm not sure I have a clear mental picture of the I2C data exchange over the socket vs. a real I2C bus. Maybe it is the case. I think it would be nice to have a short doc (ASCII doc in MD file?) to depict the I2C transport protocol over the socket vs. the physical I2C protocol.

Author: I've updated the protocol slightly. Transactions now start with an address byte and then a `R` or `W` for the direction - this is a start condition. After that bytes can be written or read once started, and the transaction can change direction any number of times after that using additional `R`s and `W`s for a repeated-start condition. The transaction is stopped with an `S`.

This is a pretty thin wrapper around the raw I2C functions, but I do not think there is much we can do to make it more robust (e.g, QEMU's I2C implementation does not support multiple controllers at once, and there is nothing stopping anyone with access to the bus from ending any transfer with `i2c_end_transfer` including ones they are not part of, so these behaviours are undefined by us.)

* For both commands, the address byte chosen will be echoed back if a device with that address is found, otherwise `!!` will be sent.

* For write commands, a written byte will be echoed back on ACK, otherwise `!!` will be sent back on NACK.

> * Spaces and newlines in a sent command may appear anywhere except between the pair of hex digits making up a byte, and are ignored. Unexpected characters anywhere in a command will cause the current command to end and command parser restarted.

Reviewer: You may want to ignore `\r` and `\t` as additions to `\n`.

# OpenTitan I2C Transport

The `ot-i2c-transport` device provides a way to execute I2C transactions with QEMU I2C bus devices
through an externally driven `chardev` interface.

The device can perform read or write transactions with bus devices and is intended to be used to

> drive the Opentitan I2C device Target mode functionality through `opentitanlib`.

Reviewer 2: Again, maybe remove reference to `opentitanlib` here as any host SW could use this protocol, not just upstream opentitan SW.

## Configuration

A chardev and transport device can be created in QEMU with the following arguments:

`-chardev pty,i2ctp -device ot-i2c-transport,bus=<bus>,chardev=i2ctp`

> Where `bus` is any of the system's I2C buses. On earlgrey for example, these are `ot-i2c0`,

Reviewer 2: Minor nit:
```suggestion
Where `bus` is any of the system's I2C buses. On Earl Grey for example, these are `ot-i2c0`,
```

`ot-i2c1`, and `ot-i2c2`.

> ## Protocol

Reviewer: I think the protocol is missing a version info. It is really important since the CharDev peer implementation is likely to be part of another repository, which means no way to ensure the same protocol version is used on both sides.

There should be an initial handshake to ensure both peers can exchange knowledgeable data.

Author: Is a single byte containing the version before initiating every transaction sufficient?

Reviewer: I think it should be enough to perform it when a new connection is open (that is likely translating into another state in your FSM). When a connection is open, wait for some version info (with a prefix as for the other commands, maybe `V`?) and a number. I do not think it is worth having some kind of major/minor version split.

Author: Are chardevs in QEMU guaranteed to have at most one active connection? Theoretically `socket` type chardevs could have many active connections at once. Opentitan tooling will always use `pty` type, but other users may use something else so it might be something to worry about.

If at most one active connection can exist, then I can do that with another state in the FSM.

Reviewer: Yes, CharDev is either not connected or connected to a single client.
Note: on our side, I think we never use ptys, only unix and TCP sockets.

Author: Performing a handshake at the start of a connection in `opentitanlib` is not ideal right now so I've made it be before every transaction, i.e you send the version before the first `S` (you can still do repeated start conditions to change direction) and after every stop condition `P`.

The version is sent as a `i` byte (for I2C) and then a version number (1 for now). If we changed the version handshake to just at the opening of a connection we would increment this but it would still be the first thing sent over the wire.

Reviewer: This seems really awkward. Should a protocol being designed around the existing limitation of a single tool? Maybe leave the current opentitantool protocol as it is without a version then so the PR can be merged and initial tests being done, but at some point, I think another protocol will be useful.

Reviewer 2: This isn't a huge limitation on the `opentitanlib` side (it can be worked around), but I think it makes sense to send a version before each transaction - in the same way that I think the SPI Device Chardev protocol currently works with its header that contains a version. This way you are flexible to multiple versions being used via the device, rather than it being set by the first thing that connects to the CharDev and then stuck from then on (due to I2CSlave not inheriting from a resetable class, though that is a separate limitation).

Given that I2C transactions can be arbitrarily long I think it best supports a flexible number of use cases without adding additional maintenance burden or much overhead (my understanding is that I2C transactions can be arbitrarily long, so overheads should be fairly minimal).

If you disagree it should be easy enough to change on `opentitanlib` (in fact, I believe that @ziuziakowska originally had the version at the start before I pointed out that it might cause problems with the current flow due to the use of PTYs).

Reviewer: I would have say that I2C packets are generally short, but it really depends on the use case. I was not really concern about the overhead though. On SPI the version field is in each packet because there was some free slot in the 32-bit header, but I do think it would be prefereable to handle it as an initial handshake (such as it is done for the devproxy channel for example). I can't think of a use case where the protocol would change over a session (that is a connection).
Anyway not a big deal, if this is more convenient for now let's keep it the way it is already implemented.

> - The protocol over the chardev mirrors the I2C specification closely.

Reviewer: There is a discrepancy with the I2C protocol: when reading, the controller is supposed return a ACK/NACK to the slave to inform it whether it wants to keep reading or not.

Note that in I2C spec:
* the START bit is referred as `S`, while
*  the STOP bit is referred to as `P`

I really keep thinking some kind of ASCII art would help understanding the CharDev based protocol vs. the physical protocol

<img width="609" height="640" alt="i2c" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/81b791f3-82bb-49b5-a308-4874dc34253d" />

Author: > There is a discrepancy with the I2C protocol: when reading, the controller is supposed return a ACK/NACK to the slave to inform it whether it wants to keep reading or not.

Over the protocol, during a read transfer an `R` byte is sent to read the next byte from the slave, or the transaction could be ended. This would roughly correspond to "ACK and read next byte" and "NACK and stop condition".

> Note that in I2C spec:
> 
>     * the START bit is referred as `S`, while
> 
>     * the STOP bit is referred to as `P`

I think I will rename them then.

> - A start and repeated start condition is signalled with a `s` byte, followed by a byte containing

Reviewer 2: Grammar nit (also repeated further down):
```suggestion
- A start and repeated start condition is signalled with an `s` byte, followed by a byte containing
```

the 7-bit target address of the transaction and the read/write bit as the least significant bit
(0 indicates a write transfer, 1 indicates a read transfer).

> - On a repeated start condition, the I2C target address of the first transfer will be used, and

Reviewer: I'm not sure to understand how you discriminate signaling (START/STOP/RESTART/ACK/NACK) from payload.

For example in `b's123s123S'`, is the second `s` a restart or the 4th byte of the payload?

Author: If you started a write transaction, before each payload byte you send a `W` first to indicate the next byte is payload, or instead of `W` you can use repeated start `s` or stop `S`.

Reviewer: ok

recommended to buffer commands to the OpenTitan I2C target device to allow OT software to fill its
FIFO with response data. Readiness of response should be indicated via another mechanism or an
expected value can be attempted to be read after a timeout. There is no requirement to do this
for other devices on the QEMU I2C bus.

The protocol for executing transactions is as follows:

* All bytes values are encoded as a pair of case-insensitive ASCII hex digits. For example, decimal
value 161 is encoded as `A1` or `a1`.

* Whitespace sent may appear anywhere except between the pair of hex digits making up a byte, and
is ignored. Unexpected characters will cause the current transaction to end and the parser to enter
an error state.

* A transaction begins with an address byte to select the target device.

* This is followed by `R` or `W` to indicate a read or write transaction. After this point a
transaction is active. If the transaction is started successfully, the address byte provided will
be sent back, otherwise `!!` will be sent on failure.

* During a read transaction, a `B` byte can be written to read a byte from the device.

> * During a write transaction, written bytes are sent to the device. These will be written back on

Reviewer: Not sure to exactly get it:
A real I2C device respond with a ACK/NACK on each written byte, i.e. a NACK may happen at anytime, in which case the master should stop the on-going request. I'm not sure to understand if the protocol fulfills this chronology, as I understand it is more transaction like, but I'm not sure to get it right.
I think it would be nice to have a temporal view of the example, such as
````
BYTE      0        1     2     3
-----|---------|------|-----|-----|
MAS    51W      AA     BB    CC
DEV         51W     AA    BB    !!
````
Not sure my understanding is correct.
Trying to write this make me wonder why we are not sticking to something closer to the actual I2C protocol. 
For example, the first "byte" which requires 3 characters cannot be replied to before the 3 chars, which differs from the payload bytes where the reply can be emitted after 2 chars. I'm wondering if this is not prone to ouf of sync conditions.
